many broiler producers reuse litter from
previous flocks to help reduce the
amount of litter for disposal and to
help defray production costs in house
pasteurization a broiler litter is a
litter management tool that producers
can use to reduce the pathogen content
of reused letter to decrease the
potential for sickness and disease to
poultry as well as to extend the
usefulness of the litter in house
pasteurization of litter also has been
called in-house windrow composting
windrow composting when growing and
composting while the in-house
pasteurization of litter uses composting
technology
the process is not true composting by
definition composting is a managed
process that controls biological
decomposition and transformation of on
degradable material into a human like
substance called compost
whereas pasteurization is exposing the
substance to an elevated temperature for
a period of time sufficient to destroy
certain microorganisms without changing
the substance thus this procedure
appropriately is termed in-house
pasteurization a broiler litter the
process used to in-house pasteurized
broiler litter is to arrange the litter
in two windows that run lengthwise of
the broiler house that's after the flock
has been harvested to win rows should be
made in each house if there's not enough
litter then only one windrow should be
made the windrows need to be five to six
feet in width and three feet in height
the wind rows can be made with a tractor
and blade or with special equipment
designed to make Windows producers can
expect to take one and a half hours or
more to construct the wind rows
depending on the amount of litter in the
house and the type of equipment used to
make the window the litter should remain
in the wind rows for at least 7 to 10
days while the litter is windrow the
wind road should be monitored for
temperature a temperature of 131 degrees
Fahrenheit is necessary to kill most
pathogens properly when road lit up will
reach 131 degrees Fahrenheit within one
to two days after it is wind room after
seven to ten days of win rowing the
litter should be spread out in the house
and proper venting of ammonia should be
allowed this should be done for three to
four days some producers may choose to
turn the wind road litter during the
pasteurization process if the wind rows
are going to be turned they should be
left in the original wind rows for four
to five days prior to turning turning
the wind rows may be beneficial if the
moisture of the litter is high and it
can help release ammonia
general considerations when using
in-house pasteurization of litter as a
litter management method our litter
mooster is important for the
pasteurization process to work
effectively litter that is 30% or higher
in moisture is optimum but the procedure
can still work with litter that is as
low as 25% moisture if the litter is dry
the cake should be kept and wind Road
with the litter litter should be wind
road as soon as possible after birds are
caught the wind rows should be 5 to 6
feet in width and 3 feet in height
producers must have enough out time for
the procedure to be used a minimum of 7
to 10 days is needed for the litter to
be in windrows and then another three to
four days is needed for venting of the
ammonia the total depth of litter needs
to be managed some litter needs to be
removed
time to time to ensure that the overall
litter depth in the house is not
excessive
Neuer litter has a high proportion of
banning material
this increases aeration of the litter
and makes it harder to reach the 131
degrees Fahrenheit necessary to kill
pathogens therefore 2 in-house
pasteurized litter after only one or two
phlox have been grown on it larger wind
rows and higher litter mooster are
requires producers should avoid sharing
equipment if tractors and wind rowing
blades or equipment are shared from one
form to another biosecurity procedures
must be practiced all equipment must be
sanitized and disinfected prior to
leaving one form and then sanitized and
disinfected prior to being used on the
next one also special biosecurity
considerations needs to be taken when
using a contractor to windrow litter
with adequate out time between flocks
proper construction of wind rows
adequate litter moisture and managed
litter depth in-house pasteurization of
litter can be a good litter management
tool for broiler producers in house
pasteurized litter has reduced pathogen
content which decreases the potential
for sickness and disease to poultry as
well as extends the usefulness of the
litter
thus in house pasteurization of litter
reduces the amount of litter for
disposal and helps defray production
costs
you